feat: add uipath-functions skill (Python Coded Functions) (#1144)
UiPath/skills: skills/uipath-agents/references/coded/quickstart.md

## Framework Selection

> Infer the framework from the user's prompt when possible. If ambiguous, ask them to choose:

Reviewer: functions can use pydantic BaseModels as well or thin python classes with typed annotations. example [here](https://github.com/UiPath/uipath-python/blob/main/packages/uipath/samples/csv-processor/main.py#L16)

Author: good point, fixed. reworded it so it's not @dataclass-only anymore — now says functions use typed i/o (`@dataclass`, pydantic `BaseModel`, or a thin class with typed annotations) and added your csv-processor example as the link. also reframed the agent-vs-function line so the real difference is "llm reasoning + a framework graph", not the typing.

> > **First — is this an agent at all?** If the task is deterministic logic with no LLM reasoning (validate data, call an API with custom auth, transform records, upload/download files), it's a **Python Coded Function** — not an agent. Use the [`uipath-functions`](/uipath:uipath-functions) skill instead of this one. Coded Functions use typed I/O (`@dataclass`, Pydantic `BaseModel`, or a thin Python class with typed annotations — [example](https://github.com/UiPath/uipath-python/blob/main/packages/uipath/samples/csv-processor/main.py#L16)) and `[tool.uipath] type = "function"` in `pyproject.toml`; what distinguishes an agent is LLM reasoning and a framework graph.

Reviewer: same point as my SKILL.md comment: `[tool.uipath] type = "function"` isn't the detection signal. real function projects are identified by the `functions` map in `uipath.json`, not this pyproject marker (it's only in the docs, not in any sample). pls reword off the pyproject marker.

If the task needs LLM reasoning, infer the framework from the user's prompt when possible. If ambiguous, ask them to choose:

> 1. **LangGraph** — StateGraph with conditional routing, tool use, interrupts. Best for complex LLM agents.

Reviewer: I would also include this is the recommended approach/ best integration with uipath ecosystem

Author: done — marked langgraph as "(recommended — best integrated with the uipath ecosystem)" right in the list.

## Framework Selection

> > **First — is this an agent at all?** If the task is deterministic logic with no LLM reasoning (validate data, call an API with custom auth, transform records, upload/download files), it's a **Python Coded Function** — not an agent. Use the [`uipath-functions`](/uipath:uipath-functions) skill instead of this one. Coded Functions use typed I/O (`@dataclass`, Pydantic `BaseModel`, or a thin Python class with typed annotations — [example](https://github.com/UiPath/uipath-python/blob/main/packages/uipath/samples/csv-processor/main.py#L16)) and a `functions` map in `uipath.json`; what distinguishes an agent is LLM reasoning and a framework graph.

Reviewer: `example](https://github.com/UiPath/uipath-python/blob/main/packages/uipath/samples/csv-processor/main.py#L16))`

I would remove this. examples should be static and included in the functions skill

If the task needs LLM reasoning, infer the framework from the user's prompt when possible. If ambiguous, ask them to choose:

1. **LangGraph** (recommended — best integrated with the UiPath ecosystem) — StateGraph with conditional routing, tool use, interrupts. Best for complex LLM agents.

> 2. **LlamaIndex** — Workflow with events and RAG support. Best for knowledge retrieval.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **LlamaIndex** — Workflow with events and RAG support. Most complete LangGraph alternative.
```

3. **OpenAI Agents** — Lightweight agent with tools and handoffs. Best for simple LLM agents; lacks HITL, process invocation, and state persistence.

> **Inference hints:** mentions of tools/tool calling, multi-step, or orchestration → LangGraph. RAG or knowledge retrieval → LlamaIndex. Simple handoffs or lightweight LLM → OpenAI Agents. No LLM needed → not an agent — use [`uipath-functions`](/uipath:uipath-functions). Summarize / research / synthesize over PDF or TXT (incl. bucket files, attachments) → not a framework choice — see [capabilities/deeprag/planning.md](capabilities/deeprag/planning.md). Per-row CSV extraction → see [capabilities/batch-transform/planning.md](capabilities/batch-transform/planning.md). When in doubt, ask.

Reviewer: same here. I won t mention llamaindex as the framework to go to for RAG.
